# **Bike sharing system**

Data source : https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Bike+Sharing+Dataset 

We are going to perform analysis on this dataset which contains the hourly count of rental bikes between years 2011 and 2012 in Capital bikeshare system with the corresponding weather and seasonal information. Dataset consists of 17379 rows and 17 features (columns).

## **Abstract**

Bike sharing systems are new generation of traditional bike rentals where whole process from membership, rental and return back has become automatic. Through these systems, user is able to easily rent a bike from a particular position and return back at another position. Currently, there are about over 500 bike-sharing programs around the world which is composed of over 500 thousands bicycles. Today, there exists great interest in these systems due to their important role in traffic, environmental and health issues.


This readme describes how the analysis is perfomed on this bike sharing systems dataset.

## **Objective** 

Bike sharing systems are new generation of traditional bike rentals where whole process from membership, rental and return back has become automatic. Through these systems, user is able to easily rent a bike from a particular position and return back at another position. Currently, there are about over 500 bike-sharing programs around the world which is composed of over 500 thousands bicycles. Today, there exists great interest in these systems due to their important role in traffic, environmental and health issues. Also, the dataset was collected from Univeristy of Porto, where the city has to control over bike rental from tourists, it would be a good project for us to experience for predicting future data and machine learning.

Apart from interesting real world applications of bike sharing systems, the characteristics of data being generated by these systems make them attractive for the research. Opposed to other transport services such as bus or subway, the duration of travel, departure and arrival position is explicitly recorded in these systems. This feature turns bike sharing system into a virtual sensor network that can be used for sensing mobility in the city. Hence, it is expected that most of important events in the city could be detected via monitoring these data.

## **Descriptive analysis and Data visualization**<br>
Summarized and organized all of the collected data into something manageable and simple to understand. The descriptions include the entire data set.

Central tendency is represented by the median, mean, and mode. The mean is the average of the dataset and the median is the value of a data point in the middle of a set while mode is the value which is more frequent and appears often.

Corealtion is a measure of any statistical relationship, whether causal or not, between two random variables or bivariate data. In the broadest sense correlation is any statistical association, though it commonly refers to the degree to which a pair of variables are linearly related.

## Outliers

Examination of the overall shape of the graphed data for important features, including symmetry and departures from assumptions.

Examination of the data for unusual observations that are far removed from the mass of data. These points are often referred to as outliers. Two graphical techniques for identifying outliers, scatter plots and box plots, along with an analytic procedure for detecting outliers when the distribution is normal.
Outliers are investigated carefully. Often they contain valuable information about the process under investigation or the data gathering and recording process. 

## Data Preprocessing
Data is often taken from sources which are normally not too reliable and that too in different formats, more than half our time is consumed in dealing with data quality issues when working on a machine learning problem. It is simply unrealistic to expect that the data will be perfect. There may be problems due to human error, limitations of measuring devices, or flaws in the data collection process.
* Misssing Values
It is very much usual to have missing values in your dataset. We've made sure there aren't any missing values.

* Inconsistent values
We know that data can contain inconsistent values. We have already faced this issue at some point. For instance, the ‘instant’ field is dropped since it represents the id's of the observation. 

* Multicollinearity 
It generally occurs when there are high correlations between two or more predictor variables. The fields _'temp'_ and _'atemp'_, _'mnth'_ and _'season'_ exhibit multicollinearity (redundancy) in the data. _'atemp'_ and _'season'_ are dropped as it can result in unstable and unreliable regression estimates.

## Fitting Models

Estimated distributed properties of the variables, potentially conditional on other variables. Summarized relationships between variabels and made inferential statements about those relationships.

### Linear Regression

Linear regression is perhaps one of the most well known and well understood algorithms in statistics and machine learning.
The representation is a linear equation that combines a specific set of input values (x) the solution to which is the predicted output for that set of input values (y). As such, both the input values (x) and the output value are numeric.
Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) is the standard deviation of the residuals (prediction errors). Residuals are a measure of how far from the regression line data points are; RMSE is a measure of how spread out these residuals are. In other words, it tells you how concentrated the data is around the line of best fit.
**Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) on test data: 151.6494699751178**

### K-nearest neighbors

K nearest neighbors is a simple algorithm that stores all available cases and classifies new cases based on a similarity measure (e.g., distance functions).
Performing 5-fold cross-validation on data and tuning hyperparameter 'n_neighbors' using grid search.
**KNN-119.84534328308183**

### Decision Tree

A decision tree is a flowchart-like structure in which each internal node represents a "test" on an attribute (e.g. whether a coin flip comes up heads or tails), each branch represents the outcome of the test, and each leaf node represents a class label (decision taken after computing all attributes).
Performing 5-fold cross-validation on data and tuning hyperparameter 'max_depth' using grid search.
**Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) on test data: 82.15474556915505**

### Random Forest

Random forests or random decision forests are an ensemble learning method for classification, regression and other tasks that operate by constructing a multitude of decision trees at training time and outputting the class that is the mode of the classes (classification) or mean prediction (regression) of the individual trees.
**Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) on test data: 66.31229301835563**

## Performance Summary & Model Selection

Model which gives lowest Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) value is preferred. From the above graph, Random Forest is giving better results on both train and test data. We will be using this random forest model (model_rf) for prediction of count of total rental bikes.

## Aplication and Usage

* It will also enable to find mobility patterns in the city.
* Identifying the most of important events in the city by monitoring these data.
* This project could be expanded to Philadelphia's bike rental data analysis, since Philadelphia is well-known as bike-friendly city and many students living in University City use bike as transportation.
* Research purposes to discover important trends and relationships.

## Target Audience

* The possible target audience would be city employees who control over the bike rental business.
* Bike rental companies would be another possible target audience, because, in order to run the business, it is better to have statistical data which can explain and predicts the rentals including why people rent or when they rent more.
* Government can use this data to find mobility patterns in the city which can be helpul in decision-making process.
* Bike manufacturers may find this analysis useful.

## Limitation

* The dataset is from 2011 and 2012, so it is a bit old and only 2 years of data.
* Various other features such as the duration of travel, departure and arrival position, distance, etc. which can be helpful to fetch valuable insights are not present in the dataset.
* The dataset is not realtime one.

## Improvements

To improve, we can collect more years of data from various sources along with additional features.
